Antelatex
=========

This software is a pre-processor for TeX/LaTeX.

Please read the LICENSE file before using this software.

Prerequisites:
==============

- ocaml (any version will do)

Compilation:
============

$ make all

This should build both the native and the byte-code version of the
executable.

Installation:
=============

$ make install

This should install the native-code executable file in the appropriate
place (/usr/local/bin by default.

$ make install-byte

This installs the bytecode version of the executable.

$ make install BINDIR=~/bin

This overrides the default installation directory.

Usage:
======

$ antelatex -g grammar.gra myfile.ant

This calls antelatex on a file called myfile.ant. It uses the grammar
definition in grammar.gra to process myfile.ant and produce a file called
myfile.tex.

Grammar file syntax:
====================

Grammar files are text files that define the substitutions that should be
applied within some sets of delimitors.

A simple first line of a grammar file can be:

{{[[}{]]}{$}{$}}

The braces are separators, and within the braces are the delimitors. In
this case, the grammar declares that the substitutions that are to follow
should be applied within double brackets [[ and ]] and that the result of
the substitution should appear in the TeX file between $ and $.

The delimitors should always be 2 characters long. In the same line it is
possible to declare several delimitors for the same set of substitutions,
as in:

{{[[}{]]}{$}{$}}{{<[}{]>}{}{}} 

This declaration defines the delimitors [[ ]] and <[ ]> such that [[ ]]
introduces the math mode while <[ ]> does not.

Following the delimitors declaration, there should be a number of
substitutions.  Each substitution definition takes exactly one line, of the
form:

0 {alpha} = \alpha

where 0 is the arity, 'alpha' the sequence of characters (between curly
braces) to by substituted and '\alpha' (anything after the '=' and before
the end of line) what it should be substituted to.

2 {-->} = \xlongarrow{#1}_{#2}

When the arity is more than 0, the arguments are substituted in the
positions materialised by #1, #2, ...

The following special characters cannot appear on the left-hand side of
these substitution definitions:

{ } [ ] ( )

The following characters cannot be in a word to be substituted unless that
word has no alphanumerical characters:

, . ; *

These symbols are interpreted litterally by antelatex, except for the curly
braces { and }, which are used for grouping.

No restriction exist on the right-hand side, meaning that the following
substitution is allowed:

0 {-->*} = \rightarrow^{\ast}


Tex file syntax:
================

Antelatex applies the substitutions in certain delimited parts of a text
files. 

Suppose a file contains the following line:

  We know that [[1 plus 1]] is equal to <[two]>.

if the grammar file contains the following definitions:

{{[[}{]]}{$}{$}}{{<[}{]>}{}{}} 
0 {plus} = +
0 {two} = 2

Then antelatex will produce a file containing the line:

  We know that $1 + 1$ is equal to 2.

Notice that the double brackets [[ ]] introduce the dollar signs of the
math mode. This is the only difference between the two delimitors in this
case.

It is important to define in the grammar all the syntactic elements that
appear within the delimitors. Only the numbers, and a few characters ('[ ]
( ) , . ; *' are automatically defined.

Within the delimitors, the use of double quotes tells antelatex not to
interpret a chunk of text. Antelatex surrounds that bit with \mbox.

  [[2 "is" 2]]

is translated in

  $2 \mbox{is} 2$

Whithin the delimitors, portions that are within (* and *) are considered
as comments and are not substituted.

